Thank you very much.
I'm very honored to inaugurate this series and I hope that by my enthusiasm for early scientific books, I can set this series into motion to bring ever bigger audiences here to find out about early scientific books.
Tonight I'd like to talk to you about the survival of early scientific books, but this has a long preamble to help you understand how I got interested in this esoteric question.
So I thought I would take you back to a setting about ten years ago when I found myself in college.
in the Federal District Court in Washington, D.C.
where I was an expert witness in a stolen book trial.
This is something that doesn't happen very often because usually when the jury is assembled and the defendant is brought in, he immediately plea bargains and disappears and the trial doesn't happen.
But in this particular instance, the defendant had a security clearance for his job.
He knew that the weapons he free bargained, he would lose that.
So he was fully determined to have a jury trial.
Well, I've never been in a courtroom situation like this before.
I've seen things on television and so on.
But it was quite an experience to watch the defense lawyers trying to pick the dumbest jury possible in Washington, D.C.
uh you can imagine that this is you can get pretty uh pretty well i mean a school librarian is challenged instantly because she might know something about books and so on
After the jury selection, the defense moved that the witnesses be sequestered, which threw me into terrible panic because I only knew about sequestering juries where you would get locked up in a stuffy Washington hotel for the rest of the week.
I do not look forward to this.
But it turned out that what this meant was the witnesses could not hear each other's testimony.
Which was a great disappointment to me, but something that actually backfired for the defense.
Because in fact, the witnesses gave independently the same testimony and therefore enhanced the credibility.
I was the first witness.
And I was asked, who was Nicholas Copernicus and why was he important?
And I said, well, Nicholas Copernicus lived in the 16th century.
He was, in fact, he'd gone to school at the same time that Christopher Columbus was sailing to America.
that could live in his life.
He finally published his great book, A Revolutionary Universe, which challenged the accepted view that the Earth was fixed in the middle and instead suggested the hierocentric universe.
And because this is such a foundation stone of modern science, this book is aptly sought by book collectors around the world.
Well, I was, of course, keen on a lot of news about Copernicus, and I could have gone on all morning, but I was quickly stopped by becoming a lawyer who produced Exhibit A, which was a copy of Copernicus's book, a second edition.
I was handed it and asked if I'd ever seen it before.
I explained to the jury that in those days, books were sold unbounded.
just as a sack of paper, it looked there, so that each buyer would have it found in his own tent.
So that,
If you had an Italian book, it would be typically done up in vellum, something like , a little thicker.
In Germany, perhaps it would be a blind stand to pigskin over oak.
In England, the chances would be a calf, a sheepskin, a dark brown, perhaps sport rectangles on it, and so on.
And I looked at this copy, and I said, this is a very unusual one because it has a pattern of geometrical paper on the board,
I said, I believe this looks very much like the one that is missing from the Franklin Institute.
I had drawn along my notes, and I consulted them, and I said, why yes.
It says, according to my notes, that this book had once been told by R. Concierge in Switzerland, and here I see in this book the initials AA and the number.
My notes indicate there's a wormhole in the title page, and here it is.
And I said, this book formerly had two book plates in it.
You can see the blue marks.
And I just happened to follow along two samples from the Franklin Institute, and I proceeded to show how both the vertical and the horizontal one fit exactly like a piano lot on those blue marks inside the cover.
So the jury seemed appropriately impressed, and I was then asked if I had seen Exit B before, which was a small bibliograph, a priceless from a bookstore in Washington, D.C.
Yes, I said, in fact, many people know that I am searching for all possible copies of the book, so that when this price list came out, a couple of people sent it to me.
So it was very easy to notice, because most of the books in this list are $50 or $100, but go on for $8,750.
I was then asked, in fact, what the value of such it would have been back when it was found to be missing, which I have to say was, interestingly enough, seven years, eight years earlier.
Some of the statute of limitations for death had run out.
The thief didn't realize that carrying the book from Maryland into Washington, D.C.
set the clock running again because the charge was knowingly carrying stolen property worth more than $5,000 across a state line.
So it turned out that the defense was hoping to prove that the book was not worth $5,000.
So when I was asked how much the book was worth, the Mr. Ray on the defense lawyer jumped up immediately and challenged my confidence on this.
He was promptly overruled by the judge who I think was very curious as to what I would say.
So I indicated a copy that had been sold for $8,000.
I said I had myself sold a copy for $6,800, not so long before, and that there was a copy in London at this very moment.
Objection!
We don't need the price now, we want to know back then.
The judge overruled it again and I said it was for $12,000.
I said I thought the price we need to ask $8,750 might have been a little on the high side, but not all that much.
So that it was clear it was over $5,000.
In good time, there came the cross-examination.
And Mr. Bragan had that smug look of somebody about to play a strong car.
You did not mention all of the auctions, did you?
Oh, that's right.
What about the copy that sold for $2,300 at Sopolis and the copy that sold for $3,300?
Well, I said, it takes two to tango.
And if you happen to be there and there's only one who wants to bid, you can get this book for a great deal less than its market value.
I said, in fact, I've just seen the wine copy in Italy.
It was interestingly annotated, any viewer in his right mind would price this book in the 7,500 range.
Except the other one turned out to be very scruffy and somewhat incomplete, which affected its value of great evil.
Well, not wanting to be stopped at this, he took another time.
Have you, you said, ever taken a course in Book of Race?
Well, no, I said, but I'm professor of the history of science at Harvard and I've never taken a course in the history of science.
Just answer my question.
It was too late.
The judge said he's trying to.
In any event,
It was astonishing, but the defendant was found guilty.
And he, of course, promptly lost his security clearance and his job, and his wife was so disgusted with the whole thing, she walked out, too.
So at any rate, he had chosen, by the state, the wrong book to steal.
The reason being that I happened to be out there as
an idiosyncratic expert in great depth on this one particular book.
And I should explain to you how that happened to come around.
You see, Arthur Kessler, in his wonderful book, The Sleepwalkers, takes Copernicus to task for writing such a dull book.
And he read the book nobody read, an all time worst seller, said Kessler.
Now, quite some years ago, it was just coming up for the great centennial of Copernicus,
is we don't have many 500 universities to celebrate in the history of science.
In another century, they'll start rolling in fast, but not yet.
It was to be a grand occasion, but conferencing has been examined for hundreds of years, and it seems to me that it would be hard to say anything we really knew about conferencing.
I was discussing this difficult situation with a colleague in England, who is also on the International Conference Committee, who said, you know, because there is one,
There would have been very few readers of this book.
Maybe more people alive today who can read books clubs and read this book than in all the 16th century.
And we started to name them.
We've got Kepler and Tiefeld and Thomas Gates and Pauline and so on.
About 10, we figured there would be all that many readers in the whole 16th century.
Two days later, as I was traveling with my family at the time, we found ourselves up in Edinburgh, and I learned to see this magnificent collection of astronomy books that had been formed by Lloyd Crawford in the last century.
Lloyd Crawford being an amateur astronomer whose observatory outshows the most professional observatories at the time, and also an absolutely incredible collection of rare astronomy books, which he had given to Scotland
provided a suitable institution where it made for keeping them.
And that's how the Royal Observatory of Edinburgh got its wonderful Oedipus, and it has this fantastic collection of old astronomy books.
I looked at the Companicist book, and my surprise found that it was well-rained indeed, annotated throughout the margins all the way to the end by somebody who had done it early on and really knew what he was talking about.
Now it seems to be just very improbable that if some of you have already read this book, the very next copy I would look after and be so well out of it.
But it occurred to me that maybe by some don't want this was the book of one of the people that we had mentioned.
And it turned out to belong to one of the people, who is the leading astronomy professor at the University of Hittenberg in that generation immediately following .
To me this was so interesting, to see the way in which he had annotated the book.
Remarkably, he wasn't interested in the heliocentric cosmology, he was interested in the technical, now forgotten details by which Copernicus made the specific mechanisms for the planets.
The technical part in the back end of the book that could create great sleep.
And so,
This we knew, but it reinforced it was the way in which the whole new cosmology was taught at this leading university in Wittenberg.
The whole idea was that this is a mathematical hypothesis
not to be considered physically real, you just don't worry about it as an actual description of the universe.
And with that kind of protection, that's sometimes called the behavior of interpretation, this book went forth.
I wonder, what would I find if I looked at more copies of the book?
And so I began this exotic search which has now allowed me to see more copies of this book than can be seen.
The reason I say that is a certain number of them have been stolen and others have disappeared in the marketplace.
So I think I see more than I actually have locations for.
I'd just like to share with you some of the libraries that I went searching for and give you a little bit of the flavor of this search because I think a lot of libraries.
Can we turn on the side projector by pushing the button forward along the side there?
And then you have to switch.
Have you got your machine on?
It's supposed to say yes.
I'm going to push this side.
I'm going to push through his hands.
Davis Library, many of you will opinion, Trinity College Library in Cambridge.
Now you might suppose that finding all the books in Cambridge, Kingland would be very easy, because there exists the two columns in the Adams catalog of books in Cambridge University libraries.
However, it required being around in Cambridge for some months to discover the Trinity College had not only the three copies, which were in the Adams, the two copies that were in the Adams catalog, but they had a third one as well.
which they had put aside with the idea perhaps of selling.
Well, among the books that they had put aside to sell was a copy of big cards, Geometry, which the scholar Tom Whiteside had come poking around and discovered that that movie had a copy was the one that Isaac Newton had.
So they got a little bit of cold heat about selling off their books, particularly because the price of the book had gone up.
And they knew if they were trying to sell it, it would be in the London Times, and it would get out.
Trinity College was selling its patrimony.
They were already the wealthiest college in Haiti.
So they figured it just wouldn't do it to try to sell the book.
So I got that from my senses as well.
That pays to me by the way.
Here's another library, much homeless, but I guess I'm responsible for getting the books put in the same.
Because at the time I went to visit the Uppsala University Library, the observatory library, the books were still on the open shelves.
And I said, you know, this really won't do, because they had not only big books that would be hard to carry out, but a lot of little small pocket-sized books that were worth thousands of dollars, so they brought themselves a saint.
And here is the saint, and the librarian, I think, has in his hand a copy of the second edition of Copernicus's book that has one of the,
16th century copies of what's called The Letter Against Burner, written by Copernicus, a very important manuscript source for it.
So it gives an idea.
Can I have the next slide, just to see another library?
You know, I would never have known about this library except into the Goldberg Club.
because of members who had gone on the European expedition and had been taken to the chain library in Zuchman, in Holland.
And several members came back and told me, by the way, there's a first edition in that library.
It may be the most valuable book they've got, but back then it wasn't considered so great, so it's one of the few books that is not chain in the library.
There's another interesting Wilmer story.
Because at a certain point, I decided to look into the auction records to make sure I was being complete in finding the books.
And way back then, in the 1890s, the auction records showed that a copy was sold in a Glowinger binding.
The only problem with it was, it is fake.
It was not a genuine Glowinger binding, but as it is said,
a facsimile in the best sense of the word.
It was in fact a whole auction full of banks.
And I'd come to the line of the billiard conferences about cleaners, and I was told, yes, we keep track of all the genuine billiard binaries, but sorry about that if it's a fake.
But you should try Howard Dixon at the British Museum.
And he wrote back saying it's such a joy to be able to answer a technical question when we know the answer.
He says the Victorian Albert Museum bought a lot because they wanted to get all of these examples of findings because they were such brilliant forgeries.
So, one of the less likely places you'd expect to find the first edition of the Predicast has it because of the make or the lining.
Let's look at another library.
This is Schophausen in Switzerland, a little salient that sticks up into Germany.
And the library and the museum is right there and here.
It's too small to have a real book room, so in fact, you have to ask for a reference book in the children's section.
It happens to be the copy annotated by Michael Westland, the teacher of Johannes Kepler.
And it is one of the most interestingly annotated books
of all the copies I've seen.
It is a three-star copy on my Michelin light list, and here it sits.
Interesting point that this town sits as this sale went up in Germany, because in World War II, some of the Allied bombers on a run over Germany were clouded out.
of their target, and so they elected to drop their bombs on what they considered another German city that was out in the open, but it turned out to be a Swiss city, and they zapped another part of the building and did in the museum with a tremendous number of Tobias Schumer paintings.
As a result of the Abbeid reparations, there is the Tobias Schiller Stiftel, which supports the museum and cultural activities, and in fact, supported me to come there and to examine this Copernicus book, and to do some other things for the museum.
So it was an interesting kind of situation that brought me there a lot of several times I visited the shop house.
Well, that's a number right there.
This one is familiar to all of you from Visay's Karma.
This is the tobacco factory.
But it has, however, been converted into the University of Seville.
And it has a first and a second edition.
So, of course, it's in there in the library.
They built tobacco factories in a stately manner in the last century.
On the next slide, please.
Here I am in the National Library in Beijing.
Chairman Mao was so afraid of an invasion that he had had all of the rare books packed up in straw and stored away somewhere, so it was quite a task actually getting the retreat.
These are books that the Jesuits brought in in their mission early in the 17th century.
It's very interesting because Copernicus' book just sort of simmered along until the time of Galileo and Kepler, both of whom began to agitate that this isn't just a mathematical system, this is a real restriction of the world.
And that got the authorities in Rome very upset.
And so in 1616, they issued a decree that the book was prohibited until corrected.
And they didn't go around to announcing the directions, a very specific one, a dozen places, until 1620.
What's interesting was that the Jesuits took one of these copies to China between those critical days, so 1660 and 1620.
So they knew it should be censored, but they didn't know how.
So this was the one perioscopy where they censored it on their own.
let's see on the next slide uh the way in which the book was officially censored for example that's the end of the great cosmological chapter where the princess says that you can't see any annual motion of the stars caused by the earth's motion because
These stars were so far away.
Underneath that first black mark, it says, so great, without any question, is the divine handwork of the almighty creator.
Now you say, wait a minute, what's the matter with such a pious statement?
Well, the problem is that it makes, Copernicus is making it sound that that's the way God did it.
And that was too much for the Dominicans of the Inquisition.
So that gets down.
The next chapter is entitled On the Explication of the Threefold Motion of the Earth.
I'm not sure if you can read it, but it says, On the Hypothesis of the Threefold Motion of the Earth and its Explication.
Well, just a few weeks ago, there was this bill before the Tennessee legislature that evolution could not be taught in the state unless it was called a hypothesis.
It didn't pass.
I'm not sure who's done any good, because almost everything in science is a hypothesis, but that doesn't keep it from being very impatient.
And they didn't win on this one either.
Let me show you another example.
But this book, you see, is censored quite lightly.
The new text was written in the margin, but you can still read the original text.
Well, this is Galileo Galilei's copy.
He was showing the inquisition that he was on good behavior.
He did censor it.
They still wanted to read it.
Well, our final client of the library sequence, I think,
well no sorry this one i'm not sorry it's just an interesting slide because i'm looking at so many companies you can tell right away whether or not it is censored because it is censored in these 12 precise places and you can look and say yes or no is a little censored this one
But I've also looked at the program offices of all the copies.
So here I could take about half of the 560 copies I've looked at and that have sufficient information about program odds to show where they would probably have been in 1620.
The black symbols are the censored copies.
And you can see quite interestingly that about 60% of all the countries in Italy were censored, but in the other Catholic countries, such as Spain and France, there is essentially no censorship.
It's quite interesting that those other countries considered that a local Italian embryo, but they're having nothing to do with it.
There is something else that's pretty interesting if you look at the very fine detail of this picture, namely that the concentration of first editions is in the northern part of Europe, primarily, and the southern part, the second edition from 1566, published in Basel, then populated England and Italy and the rest.
It looks in its ground somewhat, but there is a trend in that direction.
I think I have one more library to show.
Ah yes, this is on the steps of the Lennon State Library.
Several interesting things about the collection there.
One of the stories,
would take me to Holland, in East Germany, where I had looked for it from this book and found it missing.
But there I discovered that there was a second copy.
So I went back and it was men named by a communist target functionary who was not about to show me this book.
What is there about this book that you need to know that you can't find out by my looking at it and telling you?
Well, this was hard because this was all carried on in German.
It must have been very painful for him.
He made me read all the rules about not using names and all the rest of this, not leaning on the books and so on.
And he was very fierce.
But it gradually worked out, I realized, that because one of his books was missing, he was nervous about showing the other one to him.
Ah, but I said, I know where your book is.
Ha, where is the book?
I said, well, it was given by your elector as a gift to the Liberating Army.
And it is now an 11th state library in Moscow.
The rector wouldn't have had permission to give away a book from our library.
Well, I said, I don't know about that, but he wrote in it, and I said it bound with Stanius' tabloid for genesis.
So off he went to dinner and had it.
came back looking very chastened.
Because indeed, the missing copy was bound with the tabulae verdensis.
And his whole Marxist facade just began to crumble in front of our eyes.
It was the most extraordinary experience.
He went into the room, he got out his pen, redeemed the book, everything.
The rest of the librarians were making wonderful faces behind his back.
Well, in any event,
I knew that the London State Library had three copies of the first edition and three copies of the second edition because they had, by mistake, shown to somebody who had come in.
But try as I would, I couldn't get them to show me the sixth copy.
I asked for microfilms, only the microfilms of the wrong copies.
And finally, when the Soviet Union began to crack up, I got an email message from a colleague in Bosco.
He said, if you come now, you can see the sixth copy of the verdicts.
So I decided that this was such an interesting time in the Soviet Union.
It was crazy to make the whole trip for one book, but I didn't want to find out what was going on.
So I threw to Moscow and I read it and solved it very promptly.
It was an interesting copy.
It was well-annotated by one of Kepler's friends.
A reasonably important copy.
And then the young man who had taken it in said that he had checked in the library the day before and made sure it was there, and the librarian had really interrogated him as to whether I really had permission to see it.
So I asked my colleague who invited me over, I said, what is going on with that book?
when he took his head and he said, the Leonard State Library is full of Clarence signed books, which were hauled off from German libraries right after the war, and by the Geneva Conventions, these are cultural treasures, which should be returned.
And therefore, the rule has been not to let any foreigners come looking around in this part of the collection.
Now that things are changing here, we have got to pay some to some of these things that have been held secretly and so on.
He said, we don't know what we're going to do about it.
Well, when that information didn't take much, the discovery was a book that belongs to Leopold Young, a very famous National History Academy in Hollywood's Germany, also another column.
And there it was, and there it sits.
Another copy in the collection, they had very carefully taken out the book stamps.
They hadn't erased the 16th century program.
And it was quite possible because it hadn't been recorded to identify it as coming from the state library in Berlin.
So there are various things of this sort.
don't necessarily destroy books, but they move books.
Although World War II was fairly destructive of books because of the bombing, quite a few copies of first and second editions were in fact lost as a result of that.
Well, let me move on because I'm telling too many stories here.
My whole lecture is, of course, a series of digressions.
I did want to say that not only have there been interesting libraries to visit, but there have been lots of interesting private collections to visit.
And I am extraordinarily grateful to book dealers throughout the world who have been very gracious about telling me where these books reside and helping to
need to get permission to go and visit the owners.
Here I am, or here I am.
I've made a picture of my colleague from Warsaw, New Jersey, New Jersey, is with Lane Harrison-Fordwood, looking at the wonderful copy of Copernicus, which he had.
I could give you another six or seven minutes just about that copy, which is another three-star copy.
But I won't march on.
Well, we can for the moment skip on to the black spot and let me just talk to you briefly about some of the kinds of things the census found.
Lots of annotations, families of books, are interesting groups of books.
You saw something about the censorship.
I looked at the copy that Johannes Kepler had.
It's extraordinary.
These 550 copies, he would have the one where the previous annotator had written the word ellipse in the margin where there's the discussion of the change of the orbit.
Kepler came up with the idea of the elliptical orbits of the planets.
It wasn't because of that, but yet somehow there was this psychological scene firing at the time of the time bomb taking away its mind.
Another very interesting copy,
which I saw in the back of the observatory, turned out to have the same mata on the title page as the Erasmus Heimold copy in Edinburgh.
So it was somehow derivative from that, but it had the most interesting group of annotations in the back.
planetary diagrams which turn out to have been important cosmological diagrams that had been shown that he could run it and must have been very seminal in his own cosmological thinking but they were owned by somebody who had actually been unheard of because he never published
You've heard of the business of publish or perish, well, his reputation almost perished.
It was interesting that my colleague Robert Westman found another copy, a lineage, and obtained it in the same handwriting, and there was one in prom that was in the same handwriting, and had been for years and years attributed legal profit.
So I thought when I found the copy in Rome that I found Pico's original working copy.
I was very excited about that for some years until Weston and I, sitting together in Cambridge England, began a more careful study of them.
suddenly realized that the Comte and Prague had almost identical annotations to one in Rosloff in Poland, in a different hand from someone with the probable name of Valentin Semich, who is, of course, unknown in astronomical circles.
And we realized that Sevesh must have copied yet another one of the family of books, the ones that we didn't have.
Similar, not exactly the same.
And then, like a really third-rate detective story, within two weeks I found it.
And the story is too good, I just have to tell you how it happened.
I told you before that in order to check on the completeness of the sense
I had run through the auction records to see if I could place every copy that had been auctioned since 1890.
And one of them I was having trouble with.
So I went to Christie's, the auction house in London, and asked to see their early records.
Well, it turned out the answer to the written.
Namely, they had misdescribed it, had auctioned it, and the buyer, of course, outraged about, had brought it back.
And they had correctly described it and re-auctioned it.
So this created a double record on a book that I wrote in.
So while I was in the workroom at Christie's, and one of the workers answered the conversation and he hung up and turned to this colleague and said, do you know anybody named .
My ears jerked up.
Because the auction records have shown that somebody with this name had been active in the market and had purchased several copies of the book.
So I jumped up and said, I'm going to meet him, but where is he?
Downstairs in the waiting room.
The person who wants to see doesn't hear yet.
So I dashed downstairs, surveyed the group, figured out which could be the Polish colonel, introduced myself.
We had a lovely conversation that was enthusiastic about the breakfast and he then said he had several copies of the book and invited me to his London home to see them.
When I got there, there was the first edition on the table, and I said, now let's see, this book is incomplete.
As I knew, there were black-made leaves when he bought an option.
No one else can treat himself.
so i started turning the pages and suddenly i'm in the section where the annotation handwriting on the annotations changed but i was about done with because almost any means was the handwriting matching this other group that i had been looking at it was in fact the
of the missing copy.
I just had to survey the table to realize what happened.
Colonel Neustadt, he was one of those people who liked to make good looks out of bad ones.
And he was in the process of cutting out that annotated copy in order to correct and complete incomplete copy.
I really didn't know whether the lab would cry on that point.
I said, you've got the most important copy of the second edition in private air, and he'll tell you about it.
Don't mind, he said.
Well, we agreed to put it back together.
It was a long process getting it back together because eventually, from his abstain, I bought this kind of Copernicus, the other pieces, and found within it several more pages of that book, which I, in fact, took back in giving the book to Rosloff, his own monarch and the poet, to be with him.
that had been made from it in the 17th century.
And we did some swapping of pages so that eventually got back to the thing again.
Well, that is, those are part of the adventures.
Now, the heart of this venture.
The survival of early science figures.
People keep asking me, well, we've got 560 copies, but how many were printed?
Oh, if we could only know.
But there are no previous records for this book.
When I say 560 copies, I'm taking 260 copies of the first edition and 300 copies of the second edition, because I've been looking at both editions.
One of my friends, Bill Morrison, suggested that I should make a list of all the possible owners in the 16th century and find out how many I've got.
And by this kind of ratio, I could scale it up and figure out how many there were.
So I made a list of about 70 astronomers that might own the book and ended up finding that we had about 30 of them.
but of course not all of those 70 were owned uh actually owned them and some of them could have owned it but the provenance destroyed by rebinding so obviously if i've got 30 out of 70 in fact i probably have evidence that more than 50 percent of the books have survived
So this drew me to the conclusion that between 400 and 500 were created in the first nation and probably 500 of the second nation.
And this means that this book has about a phenomenal rate of preservation.
That perhaps 60% of all the copies have been saved.
It was an expensive book at the beginning.
It was so technical it was not worn out for all these years.
And so people probably didn't wear it out and didn't throw it away.
But let's look at a different kind of a look.
The next slide, please.
Because here we find Thomas Jakes, a perfect description, the first translation of Propheticism in the English.
And with this wonderful diagram, which is reprinted one history of science book after another.
It's reprinted so frequently that I suppose most historians of science assume that Thomas Diggs' book is in fact an extraordinary common one.
But let's look at the SDC listing of it.
In the next slide, you will see the editions of this book.
and the number of copies that have been traced, adding a couple that I know about that are not in the SDC.
Now, this was a common almanac, used ephemeral and thrown away, I'm sure.
But the almanacs, being a good seller, my guess is that
Perhaps a thousand copies would have been printed on a book of this sort.
So if you look at those, and when you see that in some instances there are only two there, there are probably some editions of Thomas Giggs' book that don't survive in any copy whatsoever.
You have that information.
It's probably not false to suggest that 10,000 copies of this book were printed in the 16th century, of which we have fewer than 40 copies surviving.
This means that less than 1%, or if you want to read, perhaps less extravagant and estimatingly run, fewer than 1% of the copies of this book survived.
And you ask what happened to them?
Well, here's an account of the time when the books were sold off from Oxford as being irrelevant.
And it was described by John Bale in 1549.
The purchasers of the libraries reserved those library books some to serve their cakes.
in a co-operative session for Thomas.
Some the stoward of candlesticks, and some to rub their boots.
Some they sold the grocers and soap sellers, and some they sent overseas to the book finders, not in small number, but in time sold chips small.
I know merchant man, which shall at this time be nameless, that bought the contents of two noble libraries, for 40 shillings prize, a shame there is to be spoken.
This stuff has been occupied in the standard plain paper and wrapping paper, up the space of more than at least 20 years, and yet it has more enough for many years to come.
So these books, the thousands of copies, were used up thrown away as scrap paper, and only a very, very tiny remnant remain.
I'm happy to say that I personally own two of them.
It is a rather staggering proportion of the public surviving group of these books.
Let's look in the next slide at the survival of the Kepler alternates.
We know from his records when he issued the almanacs, and you can see that in five of the cases, there's not a single known surviving copy of it.
So this is quite interesting that for these small, ethereal books, the survival rate is extremely low.
But I got interested in doing something more about the survival of some of these early books by another curious thing that happened to me.
Let's look at the next slide, because another shame you hear,
a page from an extraordinary book.
It was a pirated edition, more or less, by Edmund Halley and Isaac Newton of the first Astronomical Royals Star Catalog.
John Clansky was very reluctant to publish, and Newton was taken at the bit because he wanted the observations to compare to the theory.
So he and Alex got appointed to a visiting committee for a French observatory and they managed to get the manuscript observations and put them in print.
When political fortunes changed, John Thomas Lee got back the 300 undistributed copies and proceeded to burn the sections that he did not like, retaining the middle section.
Now this copy came up at the Dunham auction a couple of years ago here in New York.
And I was the underbidder for it.
It was part of a lot.
And my friend Roger Gaskell, dealer in England, said, you know, whoever was anonymous on the telephone who bought that clams to the Atlas probably wanted the Atlas and didn't want this old incomplete book.
Incomplete?
Yes.
Because it has in it only the parts that claims to be burned.
Now that to himself is fairly suggesting.
So Roger said, why don't you like Leonard's office and have them hand it off to whoever bought it and see if he'll sell it.
And indeed, the buyer was perfectly happy to sell it to him.
I think you know the name of the Ray and the Ray.
I think that if I had a product bag, he probably would have cut off the tree of Ray and made office wall decorations out of them.
and destroyed the rest of it.
What is interesting is that it turns out to be the working copy from Benich Observatory as they were checking up on all the changes that were made by Halley when he ended it.
And in particular, what is fascinating is, we now in the scholarly, have what are called the Glam Speed Numbers.
As far as a number in this catalog, but perhaps you can see that Glam Speed has had been struck out.
If you didn't approve of those, those are added by Pali and not original fantasy.
And there's lots of interesting material in the copy.
I have looked just last week at the manuscripts to, at the Royal British Observatory Archives to compare with it, but that's a different story.
In Sky and Telescope magazine, a few years ago,
there was a story about this particular book and it was illustrated and it said this is from the university illinois library the only copy in america that's crazy i know harvard has one and i'm sure there were three copies in the national union catalog and there were indeed three copies in harley neither this had harvey's copy on
So I checked the OCLC.
I think most of you know what the OCLC is.
It's the great computer database of libraries, and there was only one copy of this at the University of Illinois.
So obviously the author had used the OCLC to get the book.
I said to myself, wait a minute.
I've used the National Living Analog to make sure I got all of these copies.
I'd better go to the OCLC.
Well, I have staggered the number of persuasions that the Pernicus has been tested.
I realized that about a third of them were completely scurrious.
But on the second edition, where it's not easy to get it back similarly, there were a couple of locations that turned out I hadn't gone.
And they had genuine second edition of hers.
One in Athens, Georgia, University of Georgia, and the other in Love of Texas, the Texas Tech.
It was interesting, when I asked them, where did your libraries get those books?
It had been marked soon after World War II.
I had on my shelf, I had a great collection of early catalogs which I inherited from the late Doris Hellman, distinguished historian of science and director of books.
I had the two catalogs marked with a colored stud in them, but I hadn't been able to figure out where the books of author had bought.
And I didn't know if I had them or not because they weren't particularly described.
Well, I could never think about this, but I thought, hmm, you know, I could get some more information about the survival of books if I had a sufficiently large database.
The next slide will show you the first of the eight books I have chosen to examine.
This is, of course, Copernicus's book.
This is the copy in the Royal Observatory of Edinburgh, the famous one annotated by Erasmus Wainhold.
I chose the first and second edition of Copernicus to use.
The next slide will show us
Oh, here's the second edition.
By the way, that's the one that kind of made it by Thomas Gates.
And it's in Geneva, surprisingly.
The books really wander around a lot.
Okay, the next slide will show you a book from Yolars Kepler.
I chose his greatest book, The Astronomy Anode, in which he announces the elliptical order of the planets.
And also, on the next slide, I chose, here's Rinaldi in papers.
Particularly because we know that the emperor was always in arrears in paying Kepler's salary.
So the emperor said, why don't you go to these two cities that owe me money and take your pay from them in paper?
And so Kepler got enough paper for a thousand copies of it all in paper.
And that made a lot of sense to me because Harvard, at one time, has had five copies of the revolving tables.
So it seemed to me that it ought to be a pretty common book.
Okay, the next one I read for two books by Galileo.
Here is this Liberius Lucius of Galileo.
The Starry Messenger, his first print book published in 1610.
And then the next one, the Yamago, the one that got in trouble with the Inquisition.
This, by the way, is Harvard's copy with the autograph of Galileo, across the bottom of it, a presentation from the author, in 1632.
Again, we know that this book was printed in 1,000 copies.
and we know that we look very perfect, face it compared to the common law.
And finally, Isaac Newton's Principia.
The first edition, 1687, and the second edition, 1713, because we know that the second edition was published in an edition of 750 copies.
Now let's look at the results on the next slide, and a very busy slide in the essay, of the numbers of these books.
Now, first of all, I have to do a lot of research for this lecture.
Because in purple and blue are the number of copies recorded by the OCLC.
but the purple down here are the number of genuine copies in the OCL series.
Their records are enormously contaminated with facsimiles, and microfilm, and microfilm, and anything else.
The second edition, in which it's very difficult to get a facsimile, has only a couple of duplicators, but not any spurious ones.
Now, I have to say this was true a month ago.
But this is a moving target.
I've written letters to 70 libraries, and as a result, librarians all over the country are correcting the records on the ACLs.
So it's probably much better, much more accurate today than it was a month ago when I started.
The numbers from the National Union catalog are in orange.
you'll notice that there seems to be a striking overabundance of the First Nation of Newton's law.
I didn't really suspect it, but then I began to compare my notes, and I found that at least six of the copies in the National Union catalog are also facsimiles.
So that is not totally perfect either to maintain.
I already knew there were a couple of them in law on the First Nation of the Press.
In yellow are the actual number of copies of these books in the United States.
You know, plus or minus one, because I think my census is really pretty accurate at this point.
It includes private collections, which these databases don't intend to get.
So I always will have more than these lists will show.
But you can see that on average, they're picking up something like a third to 40% of the copies.
The blue strips are the census of books in European astronomy libraries.
And I just thought this would be another interesting database to include, but the numbers are so small they're probably not statistically significant.
What you can see is that Galileo's Siderius Centius is the rarest book of the lot.
And I think all lookingers would be fully aware of that.
The Astronomia Nova, the second rarest of the group.
Newton's Principia, comparatively common, the Bialogos, comparatively common.
Let's look on the next slide at the actual information.